I'm going to point out just one big
fundamental problem with the series
finale of Game of Thrones I'm gonna
point it out because I think it's
something other people will not say I
think other commentators and critics are
gonna pre it be preoccupied with many of
the very real very glaring errors in
continuity problems with characters
problems with holes in the plot loose
ends and storylines that were never tied
up just all kinds of things that flatly
make no sense or that they find
subjectively dissatisfactory I am NOT
going to discuss any of that I'm gonna
ask you to cast your mind back to a time
when you were trying to convince your
friends to watch this show maybe a
brother a sister maybe your boyfriend or
girlfriend at some point your life maybe
five years ago maybe eight years ago you
were writing an email to a friend or
phoning a friend and saying hey you know
what you should give this TV show a
chance it's not like Lord of the Rings
it's not like Dungeons & Dragons it's
not like some mainstream crap on TV you
grew up with it's not the next Xena
Warrior Princess and you can probably
remember even if distantly why it was or
how it was you justified this to your
friends for many people they probably
said in whatever words the reason why
you should watch this show is realism
and in the last few years that concept
has become the butt of jokes people said
oh well how can you talk about realism
in a TV show that has dragons and fire
magic and wizards and what-have-you and
yet we all know you know we all remember
from those first four years of this TV
show what it was that realism meant it
is very simply a sense of social realism
a sense of political realism that this
TV show had
and that it lost I'm going to illustrate
this with two elements of two elements
that are flagrantly on display in the
season finale but they've they've really
impaired the quality of the last several
years of the TV show do you notice that
people just stand around like dancers
like like performance artists on a
soundstage ready to go into action
people sometimes hundreds of people in a
scene soon as dozens just stand in
silence wasn't like that in season one
wasn't like that in seasons two three
and four okay and that's now become
routine characters communicate over a
huge distance by whispering or speaking
in a very low voice when facing away
from the character they're talking to
cinemas while walking Suns all standing
in a throne room and there's nobody else
around now my problem here isn't just
one of style I think it really is one of
substance think back to the first time
Tyrion Lannister was put on trial the
first and second times
Tyrion Lannister is front row he's
shouting right he's shouting at the
people who are judging him the first
trial you'll remember ends with Bronn
fighting in a trial by combat the second
trial ends with him murdering Shae long
story short right there was a room full
of skeptical people right different
actors asking different questions and
even if they weren't speaking adding
their own weight and scrutiny to the
scene there were different competing
interests and you know this reflects and
it also exemplifies the way in which the
early seasons of the show conveyed a
sense of social realism a sense of
political complexity of many different
players in the game having different
motives now the books are even better
and here's why
in the books when Jaime Lannister goes
to visit a prison he meets a character
who's called the the chief under jailor
he's the head of the underground prison
thus the under under jailer and when
Jaime Lannister meets that character
that character does not think of himself
as a bit part that character does not
think of himself as a mere peasant that
character thinks of himself as the main
character in his own story the way
george RR martin writes is that even the
smallest characters are from their own
perspective the protagonist the hero and
the villain in their own tragedy in
their own triumph and that again adds a
sense of social realism political
realism and Jaime Lannister has this
long and for him very frustrating and
annoying dialogue with his character and
again a Brienne of Tarth she thinks of
herself as a major character and she
runs into other characters who consider
her a fly who consider her a gnat and
from those characters perspective they
instead ought to be the main character
of Game of Thrones so that's a step
beyond merely the type of social realism
you get in the earlier trials of Tyrion
Lannister but what we got in this
episode in the finale and we get in the
last several seasons this vacuous
silence the scenes of just two
characters standing around whispering at
each other in a huge room with a lot of
distance between them when they
shouldn't be whispering or indeed even
scenes of a quote-unquote court that is
in no way courtly like you have all
kinds of people getting drunk in the
same room with Daenerys and Jon Snow and
yet you know we have these very wooden
of poorly staged dialogues what have you
doesn't make sense it doesn't look
anything like the court of King Joffrey
that we knew from the earlier seasons of
the TV show right it doesn't even look
like the scene and the the great Sept of
Baelor
something we get the sense of a complex
feudal society with with many players
with with many objectives so on and so
forth for me I feel that the writers
checked out I don't want to put a
specific date on it for me the extent to
which the writers had just abdicated
their responsibility to write was
unlimited by the dialogue in which Sansa
Stark says to Tyrion and dismissively
you know oh don't bother to say anything
I'll just imagine that she said so just
imagine that you said something witty
well the show really for several years
just put these actors on a soundstage
had long supposedly meaningful silences
long stairs exchanged between them and
the audience was in that way invited to
fill in the blanks in the same way that
even Sansa Stark in character within the
show is filling in the blanks or telling
the audience to fill in the blanks just
imagine that this character has some
kind of motivation just imagine that
this character has something meaningful
to say just imagine that when Jon Snow
asks Daenerys Targaryen what her
political plan for the future is imagine
that when he asks her how is she going
to make a better world
imagine she has a good answer imagine
these are characters who have the kinds
of complex nuanced political views and
objectives that we got used to in the
first four seasons and what we're being
presented with again it's like a fill in
the blanks exercise where the script
just presents us with blanks that the
the writers never filled in now again
obviously the first four seasons were
not like that when when Tyrion Lannister
is put on trial he stands there and
gives a very inspirational speech right
he stands there and speaks to the crowd
and he says that all his life he's been
on trial because he's a dwarf and he
really lets us hear it he lied and he
has some kind of political philosophy
but I'm what he's saying even if it's
kind of ridiculous
this used to be a show in which every
dialogue between little finger and VAR
e's they really had something to say
they they had their own political
philosophy and they were part of a
sophisticated socially complex world in
which they were not the most important
person they were not a sole voice an
isolated voice on a sound stage they
were one voice in the midst of a
cacophony trying to decide what
direction that society should move in so
guys the finale for season 8 there's a
lot with it other channels will take the
time to pick through all the crazy
continuity errors why is it that in the
red keep all the only part of the red
keep that collapsed was the one part
that needed to collapse to kill Cersei
and Jaime and then magically the whole
rest of the building is intact only the
part of the building that was featured
in the sword fight between Sandor
Clegane and Gregor Clegane was destroyed
apparently the whole rest of the
building including the room Tyrion then
convenes his meetings in and the map
from all that was intact so gee sure was
unlucky for them they didn't just have
their sword fight in a different room or
Jaime and Cersei didn't just stay in the
map room they'd still be alive today
it's ridiculously bad writing ridiculous
disregard for continuity Arya Stark
shows up on a white horse and then Bing
next episode the white horse is
disappeared
um sure it's it's abysmal II bad writing
we were promised a bittersweet ending
and I think the most bittersweet element
is precisely this cast your mind back to
how at one time you tried to introduce
this show to your friends your brother
your sister your boyfriend your
girlfriend you used to tell other people
maybe five years ago give this show a
chance there's something really
meaningful here there's something of
value here and now here we are in 2019
and we have to face up to the
bittersweet fact that we were wrong